BeOS support
============

XaoS has pretty advanced support for BeOS R4. It works on both PowerPC and
Intel platforms, supports multithreading, the clipboard, file dragging, has
native look and feel and can work as an image translator from XaoS files to
images.

The first version of the BeOS driver was written by Jens Kilian and later
extended by Jan Hubicka.

Installation
------------

You can start the installation script to do everything for you. If you want
something special, read this section.

In order for XaoS to work you need to keep the executable together with its
data files (help, examples, catalogs and the tutorials directory)

When first started, XaoS registers two new mime types called
image/x-xaos-position for XaoS Position Files and video/x-xaos-animation for
XaoS Animation Files, registers icons for them and sets itself as default
application.

Available display drivers
-------------------------

XaoS supports following drivers:

BeOS

    Standard windowed driver using application server

DirectWindow

    Driver done using Game Kit's direct window class

WindowScreen

    Fullscreen driver.

By default, XaoS starts in windowed mode and uses the application server for
output. You could change the driver to DirectWindow to use direct access to
video RAM. Note that this mode is slower in most cases, and not supported by
some videocards.

The BeOS driver by default chooses the most similar bitmap supported by XaoS to
achieve best and fastest results. In the UI menu you can change this default
choice to another one if you wish. Also you can ask the BeOS and DirectWindow
to resize to fullscreen mode.

XaoS also supports real fullscreen mode using the BWindowScreen API. To switch
XaoS to this driver, use the UI menu. If you want to use this mode by default,
use the -driver WindowScreen command line option.

This driver differs a lot from windowed ones. It use direct access to the video
card, allowing you to change video mode. Also, the 256 color mode can access
the palette, so it is not dithered like the windowed mode. Because BeOS can't
do GUI in fullscreen mode, XaoS uses its own toolkit. I hope you will feel
confortable in it.

XaoS as translator
------------------

You should be able to open XaoS files in graphics applications such as
ShowImage or ArtPaing. In Preferences you can find the DataTranslations
program, that can be used to set the size, type and DPI of the resulting image.
Also antialiasing can be enabled.

Note that **translation can take a while**. So be patient and wait for the
result.

If the translator doesn't work, ensure that you have a link to the XaoS
executable in /boot/beos/system/add-ons/Translators/.
